docs: add Triggering On-Call Pages section to Nagios README (#22991)
DataDog/integrations-core: nagios/README.md

The Nagios check does not include any service checks.

> ## Triggering On-Call Pages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Trigger on-call pages
```

> Because Nagios events are submitted by the Datadog Agent through the `/intake` endpoint, the `oncall_team` query parameter approach is not available. Instead, configure Nagios notification commands to POST events directly to the [Datadog Events API][11], bypassing the Agent.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to mention internal implementation details like `/intake` endpoint

> Because Nagios events are submitted by the Datadog Agent through the `/intake` endpoint, the `oncall_team` query parameter approach is not available. Instead, configure Nagios notification commands to POST events directly to the [Datadog Events API][11], bypassing the Agent.

Reviewer: I agree with the comment from @josemallma-dd. We shouldn't document implementation details. My suggestion below preserves the information for the user, but takes out the reference to the `/intake` endpoint.
```suggestion
The `oncall_team` query parameter approach is not available for triggering on-call pages. Instead, configure Nagios notification commands to POST events directly to the [Datadog Events API][11], bypassing the Agent.
```

> ### How it works

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Map Nagios events to on-call pages
```

Nagios sends an event to Datadog with an `@oncall-<team-handle>` mention in the event text. Datadog On-Call matches this mention and pages the on-call team.

- Events with `alert_type: error` or `alert_type: warning` paired with a shared `aggregation_key` deduplicate into a single page.
- An event with `alert_type: success` and the same `aggregation_key` auto-resolves the page.
- Events with `alert_type: info` do not trigger or resolve pages.

### Status mapping

| Nagios state | Datadog `alert_type` |
|---|---|
| `CRITICAL` / `DOWN` | `error` |
| `WARNING` | `warning` |
| `OK` / `UP` | `success` |
| `UNKNOWN` | `info` |

### Setup

> **Step 1: Create the notification script**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Create the notification script
```

Create `/usr/local/nagios/libexec/notify_datadog_oncall.sh`:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
set -u

DD_API_KEY="<YOUR_DATADOG_API_KEY>"

> DD_SITE="datadoghq.com"  # Change to your site, e.g. datadoghq.eu, us3.datadoghq.com

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DD_SITE="datadoghq.com"  # Change to your site. For example, datadoghq.eu, us3.datadoghq.com
```

NOTIF_TYPE="${1}"   # PROBLEM or RECOVERY
HOSTNAME="${2}"
SERVICEDESC="${3}"
STATE="${4}"        # CRITICAL, WARNING, OK, UNKNOWN, UP, DOWN
ONCALL_TEAM="${5}"  # Datadog On-Call team handle, e.g. "ops"
OUTPUT="${6}"

case "$STATE" in
  CRITICAL|DOWN) ALERT_TYPE="error" ;;
  WARNING)        ALERT_TYPE="warning" ;;
  OK|UP)          ALERT_TYPE="success" ;;
  *)              ALERT_TYPE="info" ;;
esac

if [ "$NOTIF_TYPE" = "RECOVERY" ]; then
  ALERT_TYPE="success"
fi

> curl -s -m 15 -X POST "https://api.${DD_SITE}/api/v1/events" \

Reviewer 2: **HARD BLOCKER**

We should not suggest using the v1 endpoint. Now that we support V2 Intake, all new features/recommendation MUST be redirected to the V2 api

  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -H "DD-API-KEY: ${DD_API_KEY}" \
  -d "{
    \"title\": \"Nagios: ${HOSTNAME} / ${SERVICEDESC} is ${STATE}\",
    \"text\": \"@oncall-${ONCALL_TEAM}\\n${OUTPUT}\",
    \"alert_type\": \"${ALERT_TYPE}\",
    \"aggregation_key\": \"${HOSTNAME}-${SERVICEDESC}\",
    \"source_type_name\": \"nagios\",
    \"host\": \"${HOSTNAME}\",
    \"tags\": [\"integration:nagios\", \"service:${SERVICEDESC}\", \"host:${HOSTNAME}\"]
  }"
```

Make the script executable:

```shell
sudo chmod 755 /usr/local/nagios/libexec/notify_datadog_oncall.sh
```

> **Step 2: Define the Nagios command**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Define the Nagios command
```

Add to `commands.cfg`:

```nagios
define command {
    command_name    notify-datadog-oncall
    command_line    /usr/local/nagios/libexec/notify_datadog_oncall.sh "$NOTIFICATIONTYPE$" "$HOSTALIAS$" "$SERVICEDESC$" "$SERVICESTATE$" "$_CONTACTONCALL_TEAM$" "$SERVICEOUTPUT$"
}
```

> **Step 3: Create contacts with the On-Call team handle**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Create contacts with the On-Call team handle
```

The custom variable `_oncall_team` sets the Datadog On-Call team handle per contact. Add contacts to `contacts.cfg`:

```nagios
define contact {
    contact_name                    datadog-ops
    alias                           Ops Team On-Call
    service_notification_period     24x7
    host_notification_period        24x7
    service_notification_options    w,u,c,r
    host_notification_options       d,u,r
    service_notification_commands   notify-datadog-oncall
    host_notification_commands      notify-datadog-oncall
    _oncall_team                    ops
}
```

> The `_oncall_team` value (e.g., `ops`) maps to the Datadog On-Call team handle `@oncall-ops`. Set it to exactly the team handle configured in [Datadog On-Call][12].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `_oncall_team` value (for example, `ops`) maps to the Datadog On-Call team handle `@oncall-ops`. Set it to exactly the team handle configured in [Datadog On-Call][12].
```

> **Step 4: Assign the contact to services or hosts**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Assign the contact to services or hosts
```

```nagios
define service {
    use                     generic-service
    host_name               webserver-01
    service_description     HTTP_Service
    check_command           check_http
    contacts                datadog-ops
    notification_options    w,u,c,r
}
```

> **Step 5: Reload Nagios**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Reload Nagios
```

The Nagios check does not include any service checks.

## Trigger on-call pages

Configure Nagios notification commands to forward notifications to the Datadog events intake, which routes them to [Datadog On-Call][11] using an `oncall_team` query parameter. Datadog deduplicates and auto-resolves events that share an `aggregation_key`, so a Nagios `RECOVERY` resolves the page created by its corresponding `PROBLEM` automatically.

### Map Nagios events to on-call pages

| Nagios state       | Datadog `alert_type` | On-Call effect                                       |
| ------------------ | -------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| `CRITICAL`, `DOWN` | `error`              | Pages the configured On-Call team                    |
| `WARNING`          | `warning`            | Pages the configured On-Call team                    |
| `OK`, `UP`         | `success`            | Resolves the page with the same `aggregation_key`    |

> | `UNKNOWN`          | `info`               | Sends an event without paging                        |

Reviewer 2: When using the V2 API, `info` is no longer a valid status. Note that we should use the `category:alert`, and that one accepts `status:warn|error|ok`.

Keep the Datadog API key out of `commands.cfg`. Set `DD_API_KEY` as an environment variable exported by the Nagios service, or load it from a Nagios resource file with restricted permissions.

#### Create the notification script

Create `/usr/local/nagios/libexec/notify_datadog_oncall.sh`:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
set -u

DD_API_KEY="${DD_API_KEY:-<YOUR_DATADOG_API_KEY>}"
DD_SITE="${DD_SITE:-datadoghq.com}"  # for example, datadoghq.eu, us3.datadoghq.com

NAGIOS_HOST="${1}"
SERVICEDESC="${2}"
STATE="${3}"        # CRITICAL, WARNING, OK, UNKNOWN, UP, DOWN
ONCALL_TEAM="${4}"  # Datadog On-Call team handle, for example, "ops"
OUTPUT="${5}"

case "$STATE" in
  CRITICAL|DOWN) ALERT_TYPE="error" ;;
  WARNING)       ALERT_TYPE="warning" ;;
  OK|UP)         ALERT_TYPE="success" ;;
  *)             ALERT_TYPE="info" ;;
esac

TITLE_JSON=$(printf 'Nagios: %s / %s is %s' "$NAGIOS_HOST" "$SERVICEDESC" "$STATE" \
  | python3 -c 'import json,sys; print(json.dumps(sys.stdin.read()))')
MESSAGE_JSON=$(printf '%s' "$OUTPUT" \
  | python3 -c 'import json,sys; print(json.dumps(sys.stdin.read()))')

PAYLOAD=$(cat <<EOF

> {

Reviewer 2: This payload is not compatible with the V2 API.

Please refer to https://docs.datadoghq.com/api/latest/events/#post-an-event for official schema
Also, you can find example payloads in 
- https://github.com/DataDog/dd-source/tree/main/domains/event_management/tools/scripts/vrl-runner/inputs/evmgt-feedv2-webhook-sanitization-holder
- https://github.com/DataDog/dd-source/tree/main/domains/event_management/tools/scripts/vrl-runner/inputs/nagios

Author: Addressed!

The Nagios check does not include any service checks.

## Trigger on-call pages

Configure Nagios notification commands to forward notifications to the Datadog events intake, which routes them to [Datadog On-Call][11] using an `oncall_team` query parameter. Datadog deduplicates and auto-resolves events that share an `aggregation_key`, so a Nagios `RECOVERY` resolves the page created by its corresponding `PROBLEM` automatically.

### Map Nagios events to on-call pages

| Nagios state       | Event `category` | Alert `status` | On-Call effect                                    |
| ------------------ | ---------------- | -------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `CRITICAL`, `DOWN` | `alert`          | `error`        | Pages the configured On-Call team                 |
| `WARNING`          | `alert`          | `warn`         | Pages the configured On-Call team                 |
| `OK`, `UP`         | `alert`          | `ok`           | Resolves the page with the same `aggregation_key` |

> | `UNKNOWN`          | `change`         | _n/a_          | Sends a non-paging informational event            |

Reviewer 2: We shouldn't use change here. Change is reserved for events that are reporting a change in a resource. @ClairePhi can you remind me to what we default when a V1 event is `info`? Do we send an ok event?

Reviewer 3: A v1 `info` event will trigger a page. But this page will not take into account an aggregation key so it cannot enter into a deduplication cycle, especially there is no autoresolve.

Reviewer 2: What about an `ok` event without a previously open page, will that trigger a new page? Or will just be ignored assuming that the `ok` means there is nothing wrong

I'm trying to understand what is the best status to set for the case of `UNKNOWN` as transforming that as a CHANGE event is not the correct path.

Reviewer 2: As discussed offline, the new implemented approach is better. Defaulting `UNKNOWN` to `alert-warn`

The Nagios check does not include any service checks.

## Trigger on-call pages

Configure Nagios notification commands to call the [Datadog On-Call Paging API][11] directly, bypassing the Agent. The script creates a page on `PROBLEM` notifications and automatically resolves it on `RECOVERY`.

### How on-call pages work

- `CRITICAL`, `DOWN`, or `WARNING` notifications create a page targeting the configured On-Call team.
- `RECOVERY` notifications resolve the corresponding page.
- `UNKNOWN` notifications are ignored.

### Setup

#### Create the notification script

Create `/usr/local/nagios/libexec/notify_datadog_oncall.sh`:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
set -u

DD_API_KEY="<YOUR_DATADOG_API_KEY>"
DD_APP_KEY="<YOUR_DATADOG_APP_KEY>"
DD_SITE="datadoghq.com"  # Change to your Datadog site

NOTIF_TYPE="${1}"   # PROBLEM or RECOVERY
HOSTNAME="${2}"
SERVICEDESC="${3}"
STATE="${4}"        # CRITICAL, WARNING, OK, UNKNOWN, UP, DOWN

> ONCALL_TEAM="${5}"  # Datadog On-Call team handle, e.g. "ops"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ONCALL_TEAM="${5}"  # Datadog On-Call team handle, for example, "ops"
```
